hi I'm Steve Clemens and I have a
question has the war in Gaza Unleashed a
new wave of bigotry and hate in America
let's get to the bottom
line as Israel's war in Gaza rages on
with no end in sight everything that
happens over there is affecting people
over here emotions are running High
among followers of all major religions
Muslims and many Christians since a
sizable portion of Palestinians are
Christian are rallying for the cause of
Palestine and many Jews are rallying for
the cause of Israel now both sides are
reporting a rise of racism here in the
us and we're not just talking about
cases of intimidation and harassment one
week into the war a six-year-old
Palestinian American boy was allegedly
murdered by his landlord in Chicago and
an elderly Jewish man was knocked over
and allegedly killed during protests and
counter-protests in California in
Vermont three Palestinian college
students were shot as they were walking
down the street wearing a Palestinian
cfia like this one and speaking in
Arabic so are these isolated incidents
or a rising Trend across the us today
I'm talking with nihad Awad the
executive director of the Council on
American Islamic relations the nation's
largest Muslim civil rights and advocacy
organization based here in Washington
NAD thank you for joining us and these
are tough times and I just want to get
right into the meat of things um I don't
know you you you walked into a Hornets
yest or you threw a hornets nest uh with
your comments
that you were glad to see the siege of
Gaza uh ended on October 7th the white
house uh Deputy press secretary Andrew
Bates of the New York Times said uh we
condemn these shocking anti-semitic
statements in their strongest terms what
are your reactions to the White House
and what were you trying to
say well I'm shocked that the White
House M construed uh my statement and uh
um labeled me the way way they labeled
me unjustly um and um without without
any justification that's not what I said
I never said that actually if they saw
the video if they saw my speech they
would not have uttered the word they did
so for that I I asked the White House to
reconsider their position and here what
I said what I said is The Siege on Gaza
is illegal and the Palestinians deserve
Freedom they deserve the same freedom
that we are applauding uh for the people
of Ukraine and other people who are
under occupation or oppressed there
should be nothing strange about this um
I always said and I continue to say that
I will fight anti-Semitism in the same
way and the same strength and vigor I
fight islamophobia because both
phenomenons are evil and those
communities both the Jewish community
and Muslim Community are targeted
because of their faith by extremists and
usually by white extremist uh and and we
have been fighting this for three
decades together so anyone who doubts
this will be really misrepresenting my
position and what I stand for I never uh
meant and I never said actually that I
support uh the violence against civilian
people uh both Israelis and Palestinians
any any attack on any civilian and
innocent people is Attack on all of us
in fact as a Muslim I believe hurt
hurting and harming civilians is
antithetical to my belief as a Muslim my
values and also my position as as a
Palestinian as Muslim and also as a
leader of the largest Muslim civil
rights and advocacy organization what I
meant by that statement is
there's an illegal blockade on the
people of Gaza for 17 years the people
of Gaza 2.3 million people are not
allowed to move to leave uh that strip
they cannot go and seek education they
cannot go and seek medical help they
cannot uh live their lives normally like
anyone else on this planet why the
Palestinians should be the exception
that they should live in an open airp
prison without having the right to be
free so when I say I was happy I meant
that regular Palestinian residents
walked free in the land that was
ethnically cleansed he had has there
ever been a moment where you saw the
divisions exploding on college campuses
exploding we learning even among the
White House staff inside companies of
people on both sides of the line that
are that are not that are feeling pain
but using this moment to move their
agendas has there been any time like
this in your
past this is the worst time I've I've
ever seen uh both in communities and on
campus uh people should have the right
to freely Express their views no matter
how how much you disagree with them in a
civil society in a peaceful uh
environment where we are equal under the
law we can exchange views and colleges
universities and schools should be a
safe place for learning exchanging ideas
and even debating ideas but to silence
people because of their views is
antithetical to democracy and should not
be allowed to take place as we have seen
students have been silenced have been
suspended student organizations have
been deactivated and cancelled and this
is a a serious attack on Americans right
to freely Express themselves the right
to have an assembly and and and speak
through to power it's an American
tradition to silence people who oppose
the government our government in its
approach to this flawed foreign policy
is is is harmful to our democracy uh the
more conversation the more debates we
have the more enlightened we'll be and
hopefully we will be equipped to be a
force for good to establish peace and
prevent conflicts and oppression from
taking place as we have seen Steve what
what I have seen also this is a new
phenomenon young Jewish Americans are
are are rising and speaking up their
minds in protest of the Israeli
government and its aparte nature they
are protesting the White House's
approach to what's taking place uh
against Gaza and these voices are new
and fresh when I when I say new they're
not like very very new but they have
been really transforming themselves and
reading researching exchanging views
with other people and they have taken a
stand there are so many Americans who
are learning more about what's taking
place against uh uh the Palestinians
both in the West Bank and Gaza and they
are taking a stance in fact
66% of the American public believe that
this government our government should
call for a permanent ceasefire however
unfortunately only 7% of members of
Congress are heing the call
so you know question to members of
Congress why are why aren't you
listening to the American public I mean
they elected you they paid for your
salaries no other group of people why
don't you heit the call and end this uh
genocide that's taking place against the
Palestinian people on some college
campuses we had a very dramatic hearing
uh in congress with three presidents of
us universities MIT Harvard and the
University of Pennsylvania and since
that hearing some of these University
presidents have walked back their
defense of speech in the sense that they
were asked if uh people are calling for
a genocide against Jews what would they
do about that and these uh University
presidents said they have a standard of
free speech that has to tolerate that
and so I'm interested in whether we need
to have a better debate about what
constructive and fair and civil debate
that's maybe deeply felt is or whether
we have to from your perspective
tolerate those that are calling for a
genocide of Jews which I find
outrageous of course we we should take a
very very firm and clear stands against
any call even for violence against
innocent people let alone a genocide
against people because of who they are I
mean this is abhorent but also this is
what Israel is doing to the Palestinian
people Steve what what's new is more
Americans are learning about what's
going on and they are taking a stance
and I think the biggest fear Israel has
is an informed American public and
that's why the Israeli propaganda
machine is just working hard day in and
day out you know with all the
sophistication but their narrative is
falling apart
in front of the images of children being
uh bodies of children being pulled from
the rubble of houses of residential
buildings you know um families being
wiped out um the total Destruction the
the the the the the blockade preventing
the Palestinians even to have water
electricity fuel in this brutal weather
now in Gaza half of the the the
population are are homeless basically
now so people are are seeing this and
there is no censorship if the mainstream
media decided not to show those images
Amica the American people are smarter
than that they are there on social media
and they see the reality on the ground
and they are taking a stand and you know
so uh but that should not be
misconstrued with the right of people to
live free and also to push back against
the Israeli genocidal policy I mean if
there's any pressure it should be
against this Administration that has
given the green light for the state of
Israel to do what it did in violation of
all International laws and and Universal
values and even America's claims to be
the the the beacon of freedom and and
the champ champion of Human Rights
especially this Administration who
claimed that it will Center Human Rights
in its foreign policy agenda we don't
see any of that we see total
dehumanization of the Palestinians we we
see dismissing dismissal of their
suffering and we see that they are
giving Israel no red lines and now this
Administration they feel the pressure
and the abandonment of the Arab and
American Muslim communities uh um
support for for Biden and that's why we
started to see a shift in tone not
because the you know all of a sudden
they care about the Palestinians and the
tall death tall and the injured and so
on but now they started to feel that you
know their their their their approval
rating is dropping especially among
Young Americans who see that this is a
genocide taking place with the support
Armament and let me ask you about that
let me ask you about the collapse of
that support in Youth and if you pull um
Muslim Americans today their support for
president Biden has uh eroded quite
significantly as well my question to you
when they say we're not going to support
Joe Biden in 2024 the alternative if
things go the way they look today is
Donald Trump do they really believe that
Donald Trump will be better in this
equation than Joe Biden people should
not scare the those who are angry with
this Administration about the
alternative in fact this Administration
should be
terrified uh from their own behavior
from their decision and break away from
their own base and correct and have a
shift in their policy before it's too
late is your is it your sense that the
power of the American Muslim and Arab
Community is going to have greater
Traction in this election than I mean I
just am trying to understand the
political footprint the political sway
this community has what is your sense of
it absolutely Steve uh Michigan uh uh
you have a sizable Community they are
swing voters they are the ones who
basically decide this where would the
state go uh you know for for for which
candidate and they have done it numerous
times uh Georgia uh the former president
was looking for about 12,000 votes the
Muslim Community has more than 60,000
votes right uh Wisconsin There's a SI
Muslim Community
Ohio excuse me even in Florida uh Nevada
there are sizable Muslim communities
that is organized including Arizona and
this Muslim Community is now fired up uh
so if this President is serious about
not losing them maybe it's not too late
for him to reconsider uh so yes they
they are very motivated they are
organizing and uh they do not have a
short memory and they will not be
emotional in their approach uh to do the
responsible thing but they want to let
this Administration
and anyone who has taken the community
for granted that they should think twice
before they keep thinking the way they
are now niad I am appalled by what I've
read are some horrific um anti-semitic
attacks and also Islamic phobic attacks
I'm I'm am appalled by some behaviors
that have been out there about people
expressing views that I would consider
constructive not flamb boying or
outrageous losing their job jobs um
essentially being quote unquote
cancelled on both sides of this equation
candidly and and I'm interested in the
many requests my understanding is that
care has received over 2,000 requests
for assistance and as you have dived
down in these can you give us a quick
snapshot and it's probably not fair to
give it a snap quick snapshot but of
what these people are feeling inside the
United States in their communities in
their workplaces in their schools what's
going on what's the
temperature from the first week of
October until October 2nd which is
almost like a um let's say uh this
period of time uh we have received uh
2,171 you mean December 2nd yeah yeah
yeah yeah so yeah yeah until December
2nd we've received the uh
2,171 complaints and requests for help
and that's like uh 17
22% uh covering the same two months of
last year uh so it is it is a
skyrocketing and significant increase in
the cases and this is unprecedented
these cases 34% of them represent uh
stifling and suppressing uh free speech
with on college campuses in universities
and schools uh you know uh disbanding uh
School organizations from expressing
support of the Palestinians or even
expressing uh opposition to the Israeli
policies or even this Administration and
that's really it should be a red flag
for all Americans when they see this
significant attack on Free Speech uh for
for Americans to express themselves
22% uh represent uh complaints from
employment so many people lost their
their jobs they were fired or their uh
job offers have been rescinded um CEOs
of uh uh corporations weaponized
islamophobia and and and and anti
Palestinian Feelings by sending emails
uh we stand with Israel uh uh so that
really created
one-sided uh position on on what's
taking place in Palestine a completely
unfair and created a hostile work
environment for for tens of thousands if
not hundreds of thousands of of
employees um and some of them tested
these statements and they have been
fired uh without any justification we
have seen about 177% of these uh
2,171 related to hate crimes and hate
speech we have seen the case of Wadi fi
the six-year-old Palestinian in suburb
Chicago uh who was stabbed to death 26
times and his mother was stabbed 12
times she survived um we've seen in ber
Burlington uh um Vermont the three
Palestinian students who were shot um
and injured uh one of them is now
paralyzed from the neck down we've seen
many complaints like this one many
incidents and this is very terrifying
and and Steve this is not unrelated or
disconnected with what's taking place in
in in the West Bank uh today uh the the
dehumanization of the Palestinians is
completely related to the attacks on the
Palestinian community in the United
States because you have so many elected
officials and media so you're talking
about settlers the settlers in the West
Bank attacking Palestinian residents in
the West Bank yeah yeah but also but
also here uh so many elected officials
uh and and and and commentators uh you
know have have dehumanized the
Palestinians and they have been just
ifying what's taking place in in in you
know against Gaza and that is connected
to the impact of islamophobia and anti
Palestinian sentiment in this country so
so this is this is really making
American Muslims and Palestinians and
even Pro Palestine supporters in in this
country unsafe uh unprotected and it's a
very dangerous environment nead I have
watched you over many years um be
attacked and yet you still still call
for constructive dialogue you're willing
to sit down with people but you know as
the uh uh president of Harvard said
regrettably you know she she felt sorry
for what she had said words matter what
is your experience I want to ask this
very carefully we're at War there are
people on both sides the Israeli side
those victims uh family members of those
attacked the nation on October 7th and
now just so many uh in Palestine as
they've seen as you said children women
others killed that are innocent of this
conflict
what is your advice to people in a time
of rage and
frustration and anger about words and
how you get from this moment to the
other side where you hopefully get to
something that will eventually have to
sort this out and get to a different
moment and equilibrium that hopefully
has more Justice baked in into it for
the Palestinians but what is your advice
on
words I think uh people should be
mindful
of the humanity of each other eventually
we are brothers and sisters in
human we are equal in the eyes of God
and we should be equal in the eyes of
each other and we have to treat each
other with dignity and respect we should
not allow any sense of superiority false
sense of superiority to become policy
and behavior and to inflict suffering
and pain on other people just because
they don't believe The Way We Believe or
their culture is different or their
language is different or their
background is different if we fail to
align ourselves with universal values of
dignity and respect for all and justice
for all we will be dehumanizing other
people and dehumanization is the first
step towards
genocide Jews have gone through this
experience in Europe in many places and
the Palestinians are going through this
now in
Palestine we need political leaders not
to
exploit the Visions no matter how
legitimate or
illegitimate to pass their political
agenda such as Netanyahu who's been
tried and accused of
corruption and
overthrowing uh the the legal system in
Israel right the moment this this war is
done he might be arrested and he will
lose his job we want our Administration
to be responsible God Bless America with
strength with resources we should use
these resources not to divide people not
to establish colonies and reinforce
colonies we have to use these resources
that God blessed us with it and the
American people who gave us their hard
earned money in terms of taxpayers we
should trust uh or be we are usted with
these resources we should use them to
establish peace and equality among
people we should not reinforce
occupations and upar tide and we should
stop dehumanizing the the Palestinian
people we should bring Israelis and
Palestinians to the same table and ask
them to reconcile their narratives and
sit for a genuine peace because everyone
wants to live in peace but you cannot
live in peace if your neighbor is not in
peace and if you look at at at your
neighbor as a subhuman and you can
exploit them and you can subjugate them
just because you think that somehow you
are promised something that was never
promised to you I mean we have to
decouple conflicts from religious dogma
and just be serious human beings and
treat people people with dignity and
respect even if it hurts us to give
power and influence because that's what
Humanity requires us to do well Awad
co-founder and executive director of the
Council on American Islamic relations I
really appreciate you joining us today
thank you thank you so what's the bottom
line Palestine and Israel have ripped
open deep fissures between communities
inside the United States businesses
universities media organizations even
the White House and the Pentagon they're
all divided over narratives they bring
to the crisis islamophobia is surging
and so is anti-Semitism these are
emotional and complicated issues and
we're seeing some folks become
Vigilantes trying to curtail the rights
and the speech of others While others
are using America's Free Speech standard
to utter outrageous and irresponsible
claims and aspirations there's just no
neat way out of this the sad truth is
that we're seeing so Much Death and
destruction in Gaza and it will be a
long time before conditions move to a
more constructive tone and conversation
we're just a long way from that moment
in my view and sadly that's the bottom
line
[Music]